\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@setfilename periods.info
@settitle Periods: A library for manipulating time

@dircategory Common Lisp
@copying
Copyright (c) 2007, John Wiegley.  All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

- Neither the name of New Artisans LLC nor the names of its
  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
  this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
@end copying

@documentencoding utf-8

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@titlepage
@title Periods: A library for manipulating time
@author John Wiegley
@end titlepage

@direntry
* Periods: (periods).           A Common Lisp library for manipulating time.
@end direntry

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Overview

Welcome to the @sc{periods} library.  The intention of this code is to
provide a convenient set of utilities for manipulating times,
distances between times, and both contiguous and discontiguous ranges
of time.  By combining these facilities in various ways, almost any
type of time expression is possible.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                
* Installation::                
* Fixed time::                  
* Time durations::              
* Relative time::               
* Time ranges::                 
* Time periods::                
@end menu

@node Introduction, Installation, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

    Consider you are writing a calendaring application which must
support the idea of recurring tasks.  Often, people using a calendar
have very certain ideas of what type of recurrence they want---but it
is not always easy to calculate.  Say they are entering their pay
days; this could either fall bi-weekly, the second Friday of every
month, or every 15 days, but the following Monday if that day falls on
a weekend.  How is your code to calculate these moments in time,
without resorting to contortionist uses of @code{encode-universal-time} and @code{decode-universal-time}?

    By way of a brief introduction to the following sections, here is
how each of the above time expressions would be calculated.  The first
three occurrences of each are shown, starting from @samp{Sun, 18 Nov
2007}. This code generates a list of dates occurring bi-weekly,
or every 14 days, until next year:

@lisp
;; The date is written with (local-time:enable-read-macros)
(list-times @@2007-11-18 (duration :days 14) (next-year))
;; @result{}
@@2007-12-02T01:00:00.000000+01:00
@@2007-12-16T01:00:00.000000+01:00
@@2007-12-30T01:00:00.000000+01:00
@@2008-01-13T01:00:00.000000+01:00
…
@end lisp

And this code, using the system @code{:period-series}, generates an unbounded series occurring bi-weekly,
or every 14 days:

@lisp
(scan-times @@2007-11-18 (duration :days 14))
   @result{} #Z(@@2007-12-02 @@2007-12-16 @@2007-12-30 @dots{})
@end lisp

    This next example is a bit more involved, as it unifies the idea
of @code{duration}-based time stepping (monthly) with
@code{relative-time}.  The result is an unbounded sequence
representing the second Friday of every month.

@lisp
(mapping ((time (scan-times (previous-time @@2007-11-18
                                           (relative-time :day 1))
                            (duration :months 1))))
  (next-time (next-time time (relative-time :day-of-week 5)
                        :accept-anchor t)
             (relative-time :day-of-week 5)))
  @result{} #Z(@@2007-12-14 @@2008-01-11 @@2008-02-08 @dots{})
@end lisp

@noindent To read this example briefly: Beginning with the first day
of the current month, advance forward one month @emph{ad infinitum}.
For each new month, scan forward to the first Friday (accepting the
first day if it is Friday, with @code{:accept-anchor}).  Then scan to
the Friday after that.

    In the next example, we want to step through time every 15 days,
but select the following Monday if the 15th day falls on a weekend.

@lisp
(mapping ((time (scan-times @@2007-11-03 (duration :days 15))))
  (if (falls-on-weekend-p time)
      (next-time time (relative-time :day-of-week 1))
      time))
  @result{} #Z(@@2007-11-19 @@2007-12-03 @@2007-12-18 @dots{})
@end lisp

@noindent The starting time for this example is set to
@samp{3 Nov 2007}, so that Monday-shifting could be demonstrated.
Note how the shift does not disrupt the regular 15-day cycle, it
merely causes the paycheck to be delivered one day late in that
instance.

    Hopefully this gives an idea of the power and flexibility of the
periods library, especially if used in combination with the
@sc{series} library@footnote{See @url{http://series.sourceforge.net/}.
To use the series-enabled functions, load the @sc{period-series} ASDF system.},
since times are naturally expressable as an unbounded series supporting
lazy calculation.

@node Installation, Fixed time, Introduction, Top
@chapter Installation

The @sc{periods} library depends on two required dependencies:

@itemize
@item local-time 0.9.2 or later
@item cl-fad 0.6.0 or later (this is a dependency of local-time)
@item series 2.2.9 or later
@end itemize

    If you also wish to use the @sc{series} library with @sc{periods},
it must be installed as well, version 2.2.9 or later.

    The recommended way to install the library is to use Quicklisp,
which installs the dependencies automatically.

    Here is how to load the basic @sc{periods} library:

@cartouche
@smallexample
* (ql:quickload :periods)
@end smallexample
@end cartouche

    Loading the series-enabled @sc{periods} functions:

@cartouche
@smallexample
* (ql:quickload :period-series)
@end smallexample
@end cartouche

@node Fixed time, Time durations, Installation, Top
@chapter Fixed time

The most basic element of time used by the @sc{periods} library is the
@code{fixed-time} structure.  At present, this is just a type alias
for @code{local-time} structures@footnote{See
@url{http://common-lisp.net/project/local-time/}.}, so all of the
operations possible on a @code{local-time} are applicable to a
@code{fixed-time}.  In addition, @code{fixed-time}’s may be
constructed by a convenience function of the same name, which allows
for quickly creating time structures anchored in the current year.

@include docstrings/fun-periods-fixed-time.texinfo                

@menu
* Helper functions::            
@end menu

@node Helper functions,  , Fixed time, Fixed time
@section Helper functions

There are a few helper functions for performing common operations on
@code{fixed-time}’s:
                
@defun year-of fixed-time
@defunx month-of fixed-time
@defunx day-of fixed-time
@defunx hour-of fixed-time
@defunx minute-of fixed-time
@defunx second-of fixed-time
@defunx millisecond-of fixed-time
Return the corresponding detail associated with a given
@code{fixed-time}.  All results are of type @code{fixnum}.
@end defun
                
@include docstrings/fun-periods-day-of-week.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-falls-on-weekend-p.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-current-year.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-leapp.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-days-in-month.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-floor-time.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-find-smallest-resolution.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-add-time.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-time-difference.texinfo
@include docstrings/macro-periods-with-timestamp-range.texinfo

@node Time durations, Relative time, Fixed time, Top
@chapter Time durations

@defun duration
@end defun

@include docstrings/fun-periods-add-duration.texinfo
@include docstrings/fun-periods-subtract-duration.texinfo

@node Relative time, Time ranges, Time durations, Top
@chapter Relative time

@section Helper functions for the current date

There are helper functions to get dates relative to the current date:

@defun this-year
@end defun
@defun this-month
@end defun
@defun today
@end defun
@defun this-day
@end defun

@defun this-hour
@end defun
@defun this-minute
@end defun
@defun this-second
@end defun
@defun next-year
@end defun
@defun next-month
@end defun
@defun next-day
@end defun
@defun previous-year
@end defun

and also:

@end defun
@defun next-monday
@end defun


and more.


@node Time ranges, Time periods, Relative time, Top
@chapter Time ranges

@node Time periods,  , Time ranges, Top
@chapter Time periods

@bye
